---
layout: single-bio
lang: 'en'
languages-available:
  - 'en'
  - ' '
  - ' '
  - ' '
index: 'primary'
categories: 'h'
eulogy: ''
history: ''
memory: ''
obituary: ''
permalink: '/stories/south-africa/hopa-ephraim/'
title: 'Hopa, Ephraim Langton Mzamo'
alternate: ''
date: '1999'
century:
  - '20th'
tradition: 'orthodox'
affiliation:
  - 'ethiopian orthodox church of south africa; anglican (order of ethiopia)'
country:
  - 'south africa'
ancient: ''
artist: ''
catechist: ''
clergy: ''
ecumenist: ''
evangelist: ''
nationalist: ''
martyr: ''
persecuted: ''
medical: ''
missionary: ''
musician: ''
nonafrican: ''
nonchristian: ''
photo: ''
scholar: ''
theologian: ''
translator: ''
women: ''
youth: ''
author: 'Hayes, Stephen'
institution: ''
liaison: ''
project-luke: ''
upload: 2000-01-01
---


Hopa was trained for ordination at St. Bede's College, Umtata,
in 1938. He was ordained a deacon in the Anglican Church in 1940, and priest in
1943. He was missioner in the Order of Ethiopia at St. Barnabas, East London
1946-1955, and at Uitenhage 1955-1962. He moved to Senaoane in the Diocese of
Johannesburg 1963-1970. In 1970 we was elected Provincial of the Order of
Ethiopia, which was in association with the Church of the Province of Southern
Africa (Crockfords 1982).

In 1979 the Provincial Synod of the Church of the Province of Southern Africa
(Anglican) agreed that a bishop could be consecrated for the Order of Ethiopia,
but when the elective assembly met no candidate had a sufficient majority. The
synod of bishops of the CPSA then appointed the Rev. Siqibo Dwane, a grandson of
the founder, to be the first bishop of the Order of Ethiopia. Many members of
the order were dissatisfied with this, since Dwane himself had never been a
member of the Order, and they disagreed with his theology.

In 1983 Hopa led a group that broke from the Order of Ethiopia and united
with the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. The Ethiopian Archbishop of New York came to
South Africa and ordained several priests and deacons. They were hampered,
however, by a lack of theological training, but this was remedied when, in the
1990s, there was considerable Ethiopian immigration to South Africa, and some of
the immigrants provided help in teaching. Hopa therefore fulfilled one of the
original goals of the Ethiopian movement, 90 years after it had started.

Stephen Hayes

---

# Bibliography

Interview: Stephen Hayes with Rev. Diliza Valisa, July 1997.

Crockford's Clerical Directory, 1982.

---

This article is generated by the *Database of African
Church Leaders*, which is part of the [Database of African Independent Churches](http://www.geocities.com/missionalia/aicdb.htm) maintained by Stephen Hayes. All rights reserved.