---
layout: single-news
title:  "DACB Transfers to the Center For Global Christianity and Mission At Boston University School of Theology"
date:   2013-10-03
lang: en
languages-available:
  - en
  - ' '
  - ' '
  - ' '
---
The academic year 2011-2012, during which Project Manager Michèle Sigg networked for the DACB while studying at Africa International University (formerly NEGST) in Nairobi, Kenya, represented a year of transition for the Dictionary. During this time, the physical home of the online database was transferred from the Overseas Ministries Study Center (OMSC) to the Center for Global Christianity and Mission (CGCM) directed by Dr. Dana Robert at Boston University School of Theology.

As part of the transfer, Michèle Sigg entered the doctoral program in World Christianity and Christian Mission, starting in the fall of 2012. Since then she has continued in her role as project manager but on a part-time basis, in addition to her studies. Moreover, DACB Project Director Jonathan Bonk retired from his position as Executive Director of OMSC in June of 2013. He will, however, continue in his role as project director of the DACB for the next five years.

The academic year 2013-2014 is another year of planning and transformation for the DACB in the wake of this transition to a new location in a major research university deeply engaged in the study of Christianity in the Global South. During this year, the executive committee of the DACB, composed of Dr. Jonathan Bonk (project director), Dr. Dana Robert (CGCM director), and Michèle Sigg (project manager) will be charting the way forward in dialogue with our partners for the next chapter of the DACB's mission to document the history of African Christianity.
